---
layout: post
title:  "Redefining Failure with The Lean Startup"
date:   2018-09-17
author: Jared Johnson
---

Last fall, I had an idea to build a real estate crowdfunding startup. Along with another MIT student, I  applied for DesignX, an accelerator program based out of the School of Architecture + Planning. Only four months after starting our venture, I left the team. Frustrated with the pace of progress, I forced the team to take a trip to New York to hear from some potential users. After returning with many of my assumptions invalidated, I wanted to move on. I consider this experience a failure because I failed to lead my team down a more [hypothesis-driven path (Eric Ries, _The Lean Startup_)](https://smile.amazon.com/Lean-Startup-Entrepreneurs-Continuous-Innovation/dp/0307887898/ref=sr_1_1%3Fie=UTF8%26qid=1450159620%26sr=8-1%26keywords=lean+startup). We spent months ironing out the details of our business model before actually talking to customers. Our most critical assumption went untested for the entirety of our venture. It was only once we presented our model to users that we realized that we had no business at all.

Our team set out to build a platform to connect investors and developers within a community. I want to differentiate my use of _platform_ from the way that [David Eaves](https://medium.com/@daeaves), director of digital HKS at Harvard Kennedy School, uses it to describe a set of rules and resources for others to build services on top off. We wanted a closed and controlled ecosystem to pool and distribute investment dollars. I assumed that cheaper financing for projects that already had community support would be a compelling proposition for developers. We built wireframes and mockups and I even started to code out an early version of this platform. We went back and forth over which city to start in and searched for project sites. The comfort of being in accelerator program with funding made me believe we were doing everything right.

Almost none of our research had been with our potential users. In our platform model, we had two groups of users: investors and developers. To our credit, we spoke with a dozen or so people who expressed interest in signing up on our platform as an investor. The other side of the market was completely unclear to us. When my comfort wore off, I started to have doubts. I wanted to learn from developers. What did they want? How could we design around them to make our platform a no-brainer to use? Our team booked a trip to New York, where we had a few real estate contacts, in search of these answers. We learned that developers, in large, didn't want to work on someone else's idea. Even cheap financing didn't make these projects more attractive than one of their own. 

This insight was knowable from the beginning. A more hypothesis-driven process, like Reis talks about _in The Lean Startup_, could have helped. We could have translated our assumptions into falsifiable hypotheses. For example, we could have exposed our assumption about our value proposition into a target number of developers that we could sign up. We wouldn't need to build the platform to get these sign ups. A simple landing page with a description and a sign up form would be enough to gather this insight. We could also do this in person with a simple concept statement. Very early in this process, we could have surfaced the fact that our venture would not work.

In response to this invalidation, we could have adapted to what we learned. We felt exhausted and disillusioned by failure but a key component of a lean process is redefining failure. The goal is to learn and adapt. I am still confident in the consumer demand for smaller real estate investments. A lean process could generate new hypotheses about how to incentive a supply of investment opportunities. If our team were to generate more assumptions and test them, we could have increased our odds of success.

Lean and [agile methodology](http://www.agilenutshell.com/agile_vs_waterfall) is often contrasted with the "waterfall" approach. Waterfall is common in the world of project management and emphasizes planning at the expense of testing. Testing comes last in the waterfall approach and is often where shortcuts are taken. While I have been a part of teams that employed waterfall, I am more susceptible to what Ries refers to as the "Just Do It" approach. This is, as the name suggests, when an entrepreneur expresses a bias for action at the expense of direction and goals. It is important for me to remember that structure is not my enemy. In fact, a little structure will empower my bias for action and give purpose to this activity.

The lasting takeaway for me is that process is necessary to avoid, as Reis states, "offering a product that no one wants." And who better to tell you what the consumer wants than the consumer themselves?

[Click here](https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/digitalhks/home) to learn more about digital HKS
