---
layout: post
title:  "digital HKS: Should Lastpass be Mandatory for all Students and Staff?"
date:   2018-10-21
author: Jared Johnson
---

Offered as a free resource to our students and staff, [Lastpass](https://lastpass.com/harvard/) can help students and staff create, store and manage complex passwords. Although I would recommend that our community take advantage of this free software, I am cautious to mandate it. Doing so would increase the institution's dependency on Lastpass and could increase our cyber vulnerabilities. From my perspective, password managers bring benefits to individual users but open new avenues of risk for institutions like HKS. 

At a recent session on cybersecurity, I was introduced to the concept of [threat modeling](https://ssd.eff.org/en/module/assessing-your-risks). In short, threat modeling is a framework for diagnosing what your at-risk assets are along with how and why attackers might threaten them. During this session, a group of us were asked us to prioritize the risks that an adversary's likely resources might pose to us. Surprising to me was how fast we reached consensus on what we thought were the top two risks: insider knowledge and insider capabilities. 

There's good reason for this. Getting an inside look or, even worse, complete control over a system can be as simple as getting someone's password. [Some reports](https://www.cso.com.au/mediareleases/29642/hacked-passwords-cause-81-of-data-breaches/) show that up to 81% of security breaches are due to compromised passwords. This includes headline-grabbing high-profile attacks such as the one on the United States Office of Personnel Management (OPM). In this case, attackers were able to obtain ["the single credential necessary to compromise OPM"](https://www.wired.com/2016/10/inside-cyberattack-shocked-us-government/) via trial-and-error. These attackers made it off with the personal records of over 4.2 million people by guessing what were likely weak passwords.

One of the first benefits a new user to a password manager will discover is the ability to maintain complex passwords. It has become common knowledge that more complex passwords, using a combination of letters, numbers and symbols, are harder to hack. Yet, every organization is likely to have people using credentials such as "password" or "123456". Understandably, people would struggle to remember a password like "t6jML=Dh"fF%!YTuFm." Even the most well meaning users might resort to writing this down  on a post-it in their office or storing it (unsecured) on their phone. Password managers solve this problem by asking you to only remember one secure passphrase, which acts as your key to all your complex passwords. As a [Dashlane](https://www.dashlane.com/) user, I'm used to my password manager all but yelling at me when I try to save a new password that's too simple. 

Another valid concern is that a hacked password from one service could be used, with the same email address or username, to access different services. A student using the same password on Twitter as they do to log onto Canvas should concern us. Password managers have two solutions for this. Dashlane monitors for password duplication and will alert me when I'm using the same password, even if it's a complex one, across services. Remember, the goal is for me to remember only one "master" password that links to a unique password for every unique service. After switching all my passwords over to Dashlane, I couldn't even begin to guess what my credentials for Twitter are. 

The second security measure that I want to mention is breach monitoring. Password managers like Lastpass, 1Password, and Dashlane alert users (and prompt them to change their passwords) as soon as they know that a breach has occurred. This removes the burden on the user to keep up to date with the security news and can help users get ahead of breaches where their data could be used to access other services. 

Now, as I've mentioned, there are benefits to individuals in using password managers. The question of mandating Lastpass, however, puts into focus the institutional perspective. The threat that weak passwords pose to our systems has largely been neutralized. The two solutions to thank for this are strong password guidelines and multi-factor authentication.

On strong password guidelines, I am referring to the requirements for letters, numbers and special characters. This prevents users from using credentials such as "password" when accessing HKS services. More powerful, yet, is multi-factor authentication, which requires confirmation on a second device upon logging in. An attacker would need to have access to your phone or tablet to be able to break into your account. OPM was too late in adopting multi-factor authentication, which could have prevented their attack. Even with guessing the right passwords, their assailants wouldn't have been able to make it pass the security gate. Adding a password manager on top of a stack that includes strong password guidelines and multi-factor authentication has limited upside. The same loopholes (and more) are being addressed. 

On the other side, mandating a password manager could increase your risks. Upon introducing someone to any password manager, you can expect to hear one critical question. What happens when my password manager gets hacked? In this easy-to-imagine nightmare scenario, an attacker would now have access to all your passwords. [And it's happened before](https://gizmodo.com/lastpass-defender-of-our-passwords-just-got-hacked-1711475964). But as I've discussed here, the benefits to using a password manager are likely to outweigh the potential consequences. 

For an institution, however, we must consider whether that holds true. Mandating Lastpass would create a dependency. All users at HKS would need to store their passwords in one place. This increases the attack surface here at HKS. While multi-factor authentication would still function as a gate, an attack on Lastpass would drastically increase the odds that an attacker could penetrate our network. And the motivations to carry out an attack on Lastpass may increase under a policy where the software is required. Someone who wants to break into HKS may find hacking into Lastpass an easier route than going directly at our services. 

In closing, I want to reaffirm my recommendation that students and staff download Lastpass, or another password manager, and start using it immediately. Increasing the complexity of your passwords and staying on top of breaches are necessary security measures in today's world. Institutions like HKS should continue to enforce strong password guidelines and require multi-factor authentication. These measures greatly improve our security by protecting our most vulnerable resource, our people. Mandating Lastpass is, for me, an unnecessary step that could bring about new difficulties. I remain open to this conversation in the future and invite my colleagues to present alternate views.

[Click here](https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/digitalhks/home) to learn more about digital HKS
